Imaging an Aortic Aneurysm
Tasmiya Noor 
Wayne State University 
RDT 4800: Independent Study 
Sarah Borland 
November 21, 2022
















Abstract 

An aortic aneurysm is a chronic, potentially fatal, vascular disease that forms a balloon-like bulge in the aorta. Medical imaging plays a substantial role in detecting and monitoring aortic aneurysms, from the time symptoms first appear until the evaluation of treatment effectiveness. Through multiple types of imaging, we can observe that the most common manifestations are how the blood flows, the inner arterial wall, and the size and shape of an aneurysm. The anatomical imaging tests that are used to diagnose an aortic aneurysm are x-ray, ultrasound (US), computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Ultrasound is the most common test performed without radiation and instead uses sound waves. CT scan uses cross-sectional imaging to detect the size and shape of an aneurysm, and precise images of the structures inside of the belly or chest area are produced by taking an MRI. The relevance of imaging in parts of the disease will be highlighted in this paper’s overview of aortic aneurysms.
	Keywords: Aortic Aneurysm, Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm, Thoracic Aortic Aneurysm medical imaging, radiology, x-ray, ultrasound, CT, MRI









Imaging an Aortic Aneurysm
	Aortic Aneurysm (AA) is a condition that permanently enlarges the aorta and is most frequently found in the infrarenal and proximal thoracic areas (Davis et al., 2019).  The abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) and thoracic aortic aneurysm (TAA) are the two forms of aortic aneurysms that are the focus of this research paper. Both categories are distinct conditions with unique risk factors and etiologies. The most common location for an aneurysm is in the abdomen. A protuberance in the aorta, the principal blood vessel that travels from the heart to the chest and abdomen, is known as an abdominal or thoracic aortic aneurysm (National Health Service, 2020). The stomach region is traversed by the abdominal aorta. It transports blood enriched in oxygen from the heart to the tissues and organs of the lower limbs and abdomen. Less frequently, a thoracic aortic aneurysm develops above the diaphragm in the chest part of the aorta (Diagnosis, 2022). It can be challenging to diagnose AAAs and TAAs because they frequently develop slowly. Some aneurysms do not rupture because they start small and do not grow while others expand over time occasionally quickly (Mayo Clinic, 2021). Imaging is a crucial component of the diagnostic process together with physical examination and laboratory testing for early condition detection since the signs do not show easily. 
	AAAs and TAAs tend to go undetected and are usually discovered through screens or exams that are performed for other reasons. A throbbing sensation in the stomach that resembles a heartbeat, chronic abdominal pain, and recurrent lower back pain are a few symptoms that patients with AAs encounter. If the AA ruptures, the symptoms worsen and one can feel dizziness, have sweaty and clammy skin, and experience arrhythmia and atherosclerosis (National Health Service, 2020). Some factors that increase the risk of AA are high blood pressure or cholesterol, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, family history of AA, smoking, and cardiovascular disease. Experts recommend getting an ultrasound yearly, for those that are at risk, to rule out an aortic aneurysm. The recommended treatment for AA depends on its size. Treatment is typically not necessary right away if there is a small possibility that an AA may rupture (National Health Service, 2020). 
Etiology
	Conditions that lead to the breakdown or aberrant formation of the elastin and collagen that make up the aortic wall are the cause of aortic aneurysms. Degenerative illnesses, genetic or developmental diseases, vasculitis, infections, and trauma are some major categories of aortic aneurysm that causes the most significant issue concerning smoking as well (Creager & Loscalzo, 2022, pg. 1-14). Other causes consist of atherosclerosis, high blood pressure, and excessive cholesterol (Aortic Aneurysm | cdc.gov, 2021). The majority of abdominal and descending thoracic aortic aneurysms are characterized by degenerative processes, which include inflammation, oxidative stress, proteolysis, and biomechanical wall stress (Creager & Loscalzo, 2022, pg. 1-14). “These are mediated by B-cell and T-cell lymphocytes, macrophages, inflammatory cytokines, and matrix metalloproteinases that degrade elastin and collagen and alter the tensile strength and ability of the aorta to accommodate pulsatile stretch” (Creager & Loscalzo, 2022, pg. 1-14). For instance, familial clustering is thought to be responsible for the genetics of aortic aneurysms, which affect 20% of patients. Researchers found mutations of the gene fibrillin-1, which is an important component that supports the building of elastic fibers and connective tissue, therefore, lack of fibrillin-1 in the extracellular matrix causes transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) to signal excessively. TAAs may be brought on by extreme TGF-β signaling (Creager & Loscalzo, 2022, pg. 1-14). 


Manifestations 
	Aortic aneurysm mainly occurs in the aorta in the abdomen or the chest, although it can occur anywhere in the aorta. AA can affect the branches that come off the aorta and supply blood to organs, such as the liver, spleen, kidneys, and intestines. AA can also increase the risk of aortic dissection (Department of Surgery - Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm, 2022). They are divided into several groups based on the location within the aorta: 
•	Abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA): Most abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAs) occur in the abdomen. Although many abdominal aortic aneurysms are unnoticeable at the time of diagnosis, rupture with hemorrhage remains the most common complication (Department of Surgery - Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm, 2022). 
•	Thoracic Aortic Aneurysm (TAA) occurs in the upper portion of the aorta and the chest; these can easily rupture. There are 3 subdivisions: ascending aortic aneurysm, aortic arch aneurysm, and descending thoracic aneurysm (Thoracic Aortic Aneurysm, 2021). 
•	Thoracoabdominal aneurysm (TAAA) refers to aneurysms in both the thoracic and abdominal regions of the aorta (Mayo Clinic, 2021). 
•	Visceral Artery Aneurysms: The branches of the aorta that supply blood to vital organs like the liver, spleen, kidneys, and intestines can also develop (Department of Surgery - Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm, 2022).
The majority of aortic aneurysms do not cause symptoms (Department of Surgery - Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm, 2022).  Therefore, it can be challenging to determine when someone is experiencing an aneurysm. However, while a patient is being assessed for another medical issue using a CT scan (computed tomography) or MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), many aneurysms are discovered incidentally (Department of Surgery - Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm, 2022). Because symptoms typically do not manifest until the aneurysm grows large or ruptures, individuals might not be aware that they could potentially have a thoracic aortic aneurysm (Beckerman, 2021). 
Aortic aneurysms are less prevalent in women than men, with rates of approximately 1.0-2.2% in women and 1.3-8.9% in men (Mathur et al., 2016). Other risk factors such as advanced age, smoking, and a history of aortic aneurysms especially in first-degree male relatives have been shown to increase the likelihood of developing AA. Additionally, it has been discovered that the risk of AA is increased by having a history of coronary artery disease, greater height, atherosclerosis, hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, and other vascular aneurysms (Mathur et al., 2016). Males are affected by aortic aneurysms at a ratio of 4:1, but females are known to have worse results (Malayala et al. 2020). Research suggests that ruptured aneurysms are more common and smaller in diameter in women than in men. The risk for a rupture in an aneurysm is less than or equal to 6 cm. Women are more prone to rupture than men with a percentage of 14.1% for men and 22.3% for women. Mortality due to AA rupture is about 50% (Malayala et al. 2020).  








Table 1 
Mean quadratic growth rates of abdominal aortic aneurysm over time by initial diameter. 
Note. Figure 1 Men with an initial AAA of 3-5 cm had a mean growth rate of 0-26 cm/year, ranging from 0-28 cm, over the first five years of follow-up, which increased to 0-80 cm/year after 15–19 years. Adapted from Oliver-Williams, C., Sweeting, M. J., Turton, G., Parkin, D., Cooper, D., Rodd, C., Thompson, S. G., & Earnshaw, J. J. (2017b). Lessons learned about prevalence and growth rates of abdominal aortic aneurysms from a 25-year ultrasound population screening programme. British Journal of Surgery, 105(1), 68–74. https://doi.org/10.1002/bjs.10715. Copyright 2017 by British Journal of Surgery. 
Age is also an important risk factor for aortic aneurysms. The chance of developing an abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) increases after the age of 60 and has a high prevalence rate of 4%–8% worldwide (Alnefaie et al., 2022). A family history of AAA increases the risk of developing this condition, highlighting age- and gender-related risks. Siblings of people with known aneurysms over the age of 60 have an up to 18% risk of developing an aneurysm (Dalman & Mell, 2021). 
Smoking is the most powerful risk factor for aortic aneurysms. The walls of the aorta can be weakened by smoking, which can make it more likely that an aortic aneurysm will form and rupture. An aortic aneurysm is more likely to occur if you smoke or chew tobacco for an extended period of time. Men aged 65 to 75 who smoke or used to smoke are recommended to have a one-time abdominal ultrasound to check for an abdominal aortic aneurysm (Mayo Clinic, 2021). 
